So now that you've had a chance
to look at the parallel stream
implementation, let's go
ahead and evaluate the pros
and cons of this approach.
And of course, we're going to
evaluate it in a couple ways.
We're going to evaluate it
in terms of comparing it
to the
SearchWithSequentialStreams
version, and then
we'll also evaluate it
in terms of other approaches
that may be even more scalable.
Let's take a look
at the pros first.
I think, clearly, this
example demonstrates
the minuscule differences
between sequential
and parallel streams.
Here's what it looked like with
the SearchWithSequentialStreams
implementation we saw
earlier and here's
what it looks like with
SearchWithParallelStreams.
And as you can see,
there's just one,
tiny, minuscule difference.
And that's often
the way things are.
It's so cool.
You really have to step
back, and tip your hat,
and admire the genius of
the people who came up
with this framework because
it's so powerful, so
convenient, and scales so
nicely with so little work
on the part of a programmer.
So I really am
endlessly impressed
with how clever the
designers of Java streams
were to come up with this model
that was so easy to optimize.
And that's really at
the heart, of course,
of parallel functional
programming,
being able to keep a functional
programming veneer of design
and implementation,
and then magically
parallelize stuff with very
little work on your part.
All the details are pushed
into the infrastructure, which
is the whole point of
declarative programming
in the first place.
Even though we made
very simple changes,
we ended up with
substantial speed-ups
on the multicore processor.
If you take a close look at this
little screen that I show here,
you can see that the performance
of the sequential streams model
was roughly, I think,
about 2,000 milliseconds
on my quad-core laptop
with lots of memory.
And the performance of the
parallel streams version
with that little
minuscule change
was about five times faster--
4 to 5 times faster.
So it was quite a big speed-up.
And this was with
a 2.7 gigahertz
quad-core machine
running Windows.
I also have a MacBook Pro,
which is a 2.9 gigahertz
quad-core machine, which
doesn't have as much memory,
but the processors are faster.
And if you look at the
performance results,
you'll see a similar trend
in terms of speed-up,
but you'll see that the
performance is actually higher
because it's a faster processor.
So the key point here is
just your mileage may vary.
And so don't be surprised if
you run this on your machine
and you get slightly
different results.
But I would expect, if
you've got multiple cores,
that the parallel version
will run considerably faster.
And because it's inherently
an embarrassingly parallel
program.
Searching for these
different strings
in the works of
Shakespeare-- searching
for the phrases in the
works of Shakespeare
is embarrassingly parallel.
You would expect to see
this type of scale-up.
I should also point
out, too, that searching
for strings in the
work of Shakespeare
is a compute-bound process.
It's the compute-bound problem.
And so there's really
no I/O happening here.
We're just searching
in memory to look
for those phrases as strings.
The reason why we get that
kind of super linear speedup
arises from the use
of hyperthreading
in modern multicore processors.
So these are what are
sometimes called virtual cores.
And the basic idea is that the
hyperthreaded model increases
the number of
independent instructions
that can run in parallel
by using what's known
as a superscalar architecture.
And what this
basically does is it
allows more than one instruction
to execute per clock cycle
by simultaneously dispatching
multiple instructions
to different execution units.
So if you take a look at
the picture that's here--
which you can read about at the
Wikipedia link at the bottom
of the slide--
it's basically able to
run the various operations
in pipelines, where they
end up running in parallel.
Now, you don't typically get
as much of a parallel boost
as you do by having
a physical core.
But in the right circumstances,
things do, in fact,
run faster as we can see here.
Well, as always,
things are never
entirely unicorns and
rainbows, as I like to say.
So just because two
minuscule changes
were needed to go
from sequential
streams to parallel
streams doesn't
mean it's the best way to go.
So it turns out that there's
other Java frameworks--
other concurrency and
parallelism frameworks
and strategies--
that are even more
efficient than those
simple changes we
made with the parallel
streams implementation.
Now, before I bash the parallel
streams version too much, let's
just note a couple of things.
First, the performance
isn't radically better
with these other approaches.
They're better, but they're
not radically better.
The other approaches took
more work to implement,
and being able to get basically
a super linear speed-up
might be sufficient to
meet your requirements.
So it's not always
necessary to wring
every last nanosecond
of performance
out of your software.
You may just need to
get it to the point
where it meets the requirements
of the customer or the users.
So this discussion really
is not to throw shade
on parallel streams.
It's to say that there's
more advanced ways--
which we will cover, of course--
of making things run
even faster if you're
willing to put a bit
more work into it.
Now, naturally, your mileage
may vary, and different factors,
like the amount of
memory that you've got
and the version of
the Java JDK you
have will make a difference.
Newer Java versions
almost invariably add
performance enhancements, they
fix bugs, they optimize things,
they make things run
in parallel better,
they remove internal locks,
and so on and so forth.
So there's no substitute
for systematic benchmarking
and experimentation.
So just be aware of the fact
that that's always important
when you write parallel code.
We will see in an upcoming
lesson in an upcoming week
there is yet another
even more efficient way
of doing this,
which we have name
SearchWithParallelSpliterator.
And as the name implies, this
uses the parallelism techniques
we've talked about
so far plus adding
the concept of
parallel spliterators.
And so this turns out to be
the most aggressive parallelism
strategy that we implement.
And as a consequence,
it ends up being
much finer-grained and
able to take even more
advantage of multiple cores.
And as you might expect,
the more corners you have,
the bigger win you will get from
using even more parallelism.
So that's another kind
of tip to kind of keep
in the back of your mind.